Edition reporters fear damage from the u.s. japan rao refer to mounting threat friction between the u.s. and japan has raised fears among many of ensures exporting nations that the role could inflict far-reaching economic damage businessman an official said they told raw utter correspondence in asian capitals are you were small of address japan might ghost protectionist sentiment in the u.s. and jeeps to call boots on american imports of the product but some exporters said that while the cuts late would halt them in the longer run in the short of to cures loss might be on their gain the u.s. has weighed it will impose three hundred million dollars of tariffs on imports of japanese electronics quotes on april seventeen in retaliation for japan's allies feel it to stick to of pact not to sell semi conductors on vault markets and too low cost on official japanese estimates put dow impact of paris at c ten billion dollars and specks month for major electronics from said they or for ritually halt exports of products hit by the new texas we would not be able to do business aid a spokesman for leading japanese electronics for march to ship the electrical in terrestrial company ltd if the tariffs remain in place for any length of time beyond a few merge it feel meet the complete you notion of exports of goods objects to tariffs if to the u.s. said tom the tha is top cannon list at the two key office of top broker and gems capital and comb in taiwan businessman an official sar also four-day to eye wear a pair of the cds nests of de u.s. threat at as japan because it sauce as a warning to our fate a senior taiwanese trade officials who asked not to be named tie one had a trade ... Surplus of fifteen point six billion dollars last year ninety five percent of it which the u.s. the surplus help smiled i was foreign exchange is up to fifty three billion dollars among the votes large to fee must quickly open our markets remove skull grade barriers cut import tariffs to allow imports of you bus products if we want to diffused problems from possible u.s. retaliation said paul shame if chairman of textile exports and taiwan saves group a senior official of south korea is trade promotion association safe the tread dispute bit when the lever's and chapatis white also leaked to pressure on south korea was chief exports are similar to those of japan last year south korea had threat surplus of seven point ... Mess of from four point nine billion dollars a nineteen eighty five in malaysia i read officers and businessmen said ... Tough cops at and japan might allow hard hit producers of semi conduct as in third countries to expand their sales to the u.s. in honks where newspaper some alleged japan has been say dim below cost amid courter some electronics manufacture shared that few but other businessmen say that such a short tub comma shiv advantage would be out wide buy for that u.s. pressure to block imports that is a very short a view said lawless mills directed gen of adoration of farm corn industry if the whole purpose is to prevent imports one day it will pay extended to all other sources much more serious for harm cord is a disadvantage of action his treading trade his it the youth was last year was honed coaxed thickest exports market according for ever third devotes a the domestically produced to exports the australian government is awaiting the outcome of crack talks bitter in the u.s. and japan with interest and concern in the estimate rested john porter said it can barrel last friday this kind of deterioration in trudge relation patent to cut rich richer major fitting part nurse of ores is a various serious mutter button said he said australias concerns centered on co bull and beef ostrich two largest x or such a path also a significant u.s. exports to that country been filed even as japanese diplomat if matter was to solve the traits stand of khatik japan's ruling liberal democratic party yesterday outlined a package of economic measures to bust japanese economy the measures proposed include its large supplementary budget and away call public walks pending in the first half of the financial year they also call for step up spending as an emergency measure to stimulate economic despite prime minister dr so hero nath costs on afford fiscal reform throw crow deputy u.s. study presented if michael smith an meccan to crow the japan's deputy minister of international tread an industry heart due to meet in wash enter this week in an effort to and the dispute