 ... Say tan ministry says open farm credit could hit us japan's are crackled the ministry angered by hugh was demands that japan open its farm products market will tell u.s. officials at hawks latter's this month that liberalization could harm existing u.s. farm exports to japan a senior ministry official said imports from the u.s. oh crop due to active sales rise spy other supplier adds the official who declined to be named said japan is the largest customer for he how as farm products and it is not reasonable for three jew west would demand japan liberalized its farm import market he said agriculture minister months u.k. car to have zayed if the you hers insist japan open its protected dries market it would also open its wheat market where volume one or rich in art rico little to protect local farmers cost freely and canada it could then increase their weak tax code as they are more competitive than the u.s. he said and users could also buy other origins grain trader zakira clause agriculture sector will which settling who is due to visit japan for talks pay to in april sixteen two point seven has said he will ask japan to offer a share of its rice market to you as a supplier summer remove quotas on u.s. beef and sightless imports other countries or already cutting into the jew was market share here australia ... These large is be supplier to japan has been flying to post exports to ride to its the expiry of buffalo re here briefs record in next march thirty one imports of u.s. corn have fallen due to increase sales from china and south america while japanese wire been imports from brazil are expected to rise sharply this year although the the lovers will remain large supply f the e was federations sales will also dropped its japan opens up it beef imports since japan depends almost and tally on feed grain imports mainly from t west japanese officials said an indication of the u.s. position came last summer when under secretary of agriculture dan kneel and stoops said japan has the potential to provide to one of the large is perverse to u.s. agricultural exports with the beef market alone representing some one bid and dollars in new business the he was has also are zee general agreement on tariffs and threat to investigate if the legality of japanese import controls on twelve other farm products including for juices theories than path to matter juice and ketchup and sauce at peanuts prepared beef products ms lane as brains dow health kan heater threads relation with the u.s. japan stop business grow k des narain and has hours it of a man to remove residual import press frictions on agricultural products but agriculture minister karpov has ruled out any emotional reaction and the senior ministry official said the farm issue should not become a scapegoat for preparation in the in the easter sector japan is the largest buyer of fevers farm products and these issues should not be discussed on the same table the officials say it