... Econ what australian needs but rose atomic spot late australian market to big ... Australian markets a bombing is foreign fund managers did direct capital away from the anna h it states another traditional markets analyst said high short-term and crest traits bullish talk market and an increase in staple currency reflect a massive inflow of fresh once in the last two months her she from japanese in u.s. investors analysts polled buyer victor said fund managers want quality markets to park their cash in and settled on of steely a briton and canada as a diversify from volatile u.s. tolerance to cast the said a one percentage point fall in key ten year pounds rates in the past month record share prices on a ten month high for the currency of zero point seven one u.s. dollars on a list it to the inflow ... Official figures on the latest inflow of investment capital a not available brokers said they received almost daily enquiries from japan in the unite tits is a ripple a cot trillion the dollars caution about an the don't know what to do with some of that is ending up here with attraction of high interest rates and reasonable currency stability national laws trillion bank ltd economist bryan family said ... There is a flight to quality family said australia may not been the best economic position but there are and to many other countries when you want to put your money ... A stronger australian dollar was also attracting investors taking advantage won appreciate in currency it can stop all clarity of the u.s. unit analysts said ... Overlooking a more favor market than perhaps the u.s. there some people would be concerned but the value the u.s. dollar loan its bank anxiety it limited chief economist will but cross said why not put the money in australia where entry is cheaper the currency looks stable ... But turning that capital into more permanent productive investment depends on government economic policy he said it will only disappears people lose confidence in the direction of the economy but close at adding at of sure investors carefully wash the governments promised tough economic statement on me for king ... Carl happy to invest in bonds and other vehicles yielding interest unopened the bill elsewhere fund managers cut just as easily reverse the flow particularly the japanese who were badly hurt in the past pay rapid false in australian dollar and hefty jumps in bond rates analysts said kettle remain very edgy money is something was not to be delivered if the state might cause and consider tough enough on might see a substantial out slow but rose said offer investors a legal c australia take tough economic decisions cucurbits one hundred billion dollars for antar and stubborn current account deficit and a disk said a giving us the benefit of the doubt on i think they would likely leave the money heart but cross said is a man policy is also reflected increased interest investment in australia and any to shield japanese investors some rapid currency fluctuations reserve governor balk john stern lastly college in element of targeting the rates decades the yen in currency fall as even he said authorities cannot take a rise of yen because a crucial role of japanese investors analysts said they believed reserve bank cut work successfully in recent month to keep australian dora within the range of one hundred to one hundred in three young apart limits with a weekends to which west or australian dollar has also risen almost three percent on its rate waited basis in the last three weeks ... Of show buying is also played a role in the bombing australian share market it is followed wall street in other markets but is also setting its own trend in its motion the way to both a mistaken of show funds pulling into equity is but clearly in the core sector key all ordinary is index rose to a record one thousand seven in turn fifty eight point three today hill twenty percent above its level its tender nineteen eighty six while the gold index is nearly double to a record three thousand it one in same period a top de sector is also sought after japanese companies set it invested heavily in the right states a recent years o turning their attention to under values realistic particularly in the two dozen field analysts point to the recent Sydney is five-star region total japanese interest more than one forty five million dollars is indicator of the type of property being suck key thing define good value real estate here which with long-term capital investment is the kind when west
