... Goodies man calls a central bank cooperation ... Bundles man the would man close-quote wheeler called on central banks so major indus to rise nations to cooperate closely on exchange an interest rate policies in a lecture it university of serie pre released here villa said that the only walter to to cooperation was protection as man control on capital movements central banks of accretion its pear to exchange market transactions to stephen exchange rates the layer the one to have them he said he added that west german growth smokers would have to be revised down would cause the reason dollar drop gone part eight marks true of the school marks at the start 1980s a villa said the transaction gone foreign exchange markets a corti company with run the action then quote services and investments At ... Ak ... It owes the scale of speculative transactions that determine market trudged its speculative inflows cut cause monetary aggregates to grow to reverse such arise in the money stock interest rates would have to be lowered to allow funds to train of nazar efforts the monetary policy measures require different from and sometimes diametrically opposed to those needed when the money ... Stock is increasing as a result of mounting economic activity quicker said ... The dollar fall was one means of reducing the massive u.s. current account deficit but attempts to keep the depreciation going by talk ... Talking the dollar down posed proper adds a sharp drop of the dollar had led to an immediate steep rise in the cost of u.s. imports and a sharp fall in the cause to european imports but the volume of sector for imports to u.s. and rise in imports to york would take time to make itself felt compared with prices hence the depreciation of the dollar never be going further than would be zari to budges the current account over the dip a quit the said a reduction in the u.s. current account deficit would occur only if the growth rate algerian p was higher than top st demand in japan and west german t by contrast to the sting demand should rise faster the jeanne ... Injure breeds did indeed happen in ninety eight six queeze asset if a further depreciation of the dollar ms to be prevented the u.s. current account a visit could be offset by flow of foreign funds into the u.s. but only if there was appropriate interest rate differential would your penh japan look for financial investment in u.s. than selecting on a trip policy instruments a central bank had to pay great a heat than in the past to them packets measures might have on the expectation the cause second two sessions queen asset the bonn does bank was changing money market rates by operating on open market other than adjust in leading interest rates because of the signal this case to the market and its substantial impact on exchange rates ... Was not only important to achieve the domestic goals of price stability economic growth and full employment but also to tackle international problems like exchange rate problem the debt problem than the current account proper just at a.g. had to be designed at help the safeguarding non inflationary economic growth in international mona two-system nash leafy of disruptions quicker sect given the system of floating exchange rates it was none sesame were sent to banks to agreed to enter wing ... It suffice to tell the market were central banks so exchange rates o the next three years an intervention points should not be set a the they were only testing pointer a market he said an audit key pentagon tell monetary system sleeve disruption central bank should not only praveen jointly but also cooperate on interest interest rate policies quick asset