Budgie is a desktop environment that currently uses GNOME technologies such as GTK (> 3.x) and is developed by the Solus project as well as by contributors from numerous communities such as Arch Linux, Manjaro, openSUSE Tumbleweed and Ubuntu Budgie. Budgie's design emphasizes simplicity, minimalism, and elegance. The Solus project will replace the GTK library with the Enlightenment Foundation Library (EFL) for the upcoming Budgie 11 release.


== Applications ==

The current Budgie desktop tightly integrates with the GNOME stack, employing underlying technologies to offer an alternative desktop experience. Budgie applications generally use GTK and header bars similar to GNOME applications. Budgie builds what is effectively a Favorites list automatically as the user works, moving categories and applications toward the top of menus when they are used.


== History ==
Budgie was initially developed as the default desktop environment for the Evolve OS Linux distribution. After the name change of Evolve OS to Solus, development of Budgie accelerated.
Early versions of Budgie were slow and prone to crashes. Speed and reliability have improved with successive releases.Budgie v1 was released on February 18, 2014 and v10 on December 27, 2015. The versioning scheme since changed, with the current release being 10.5.
On September 14, 2021, the Solus project announced that the upcoming Budgie 11 release will no longer be written in GTK, due to unsolvable disagreements with the GNOME team. Default GNOME software will also be replaced in the future Budgie Edition of Solus.


== Adoption ==
Arch
Budgie Desktop is available in Arch Linux's Community repository as well as distributed as budgie-desktop-git in the Arch User Repository.Debian
Budgie Desktop is available in Debian's main repositories in the Stable branch since Debian 9.GeckoLinux
GeckoLinux, an openSUSE-based distribution, provides GeckoLinux Budgie.Manjaro (Discontinued Budgie)
In November 2015, the Manjaro Community announced the availability of Manjaro Budgie 15.11. Manjaro Budgie 16.06.1 was announced on June 14, 2016.openSUSE
Budgie Desktop is available for openSUSE Leap 15.2 and openSUSE Tumbleweed. Solus
Solus's primary desktop environment is Budgie.SparkyLinux
Budgie Desktop is available at the current repository of SparkyLinux.TuxedoOS
TuxedoOS is built with the Budgie Desktop.Ubuntu Budgie
The first version of the Ubuntu Budgie distribution was 17.04; it is an official Ubuntu flavor. Ubuntu Budgie 17.04 differs from the original Ubuntu 17.04 distribution only in that Budgie is the default desktop environment. As of June 2017, Ubuntu Budgie was among the most popular Ubuntu variants.Void
Budgie Desktop is available at the current repository of Void Linux (January 2018).


== See also ==
GNOME
LXQt
MATE
Solus (operating system)


== References ==


== External links ==
budgie-desktop on GitHub
Budgie Desktop on OpenSourceFeed Gallery